1. Basics:
    + 1.1 Variables
        + Declaration
        + Scopes
        + Variable shadowing
        + Data types: primitive vs non-primitive
        + Implicit casting / Explicit casting
        + Autoboxing / Unboxing
        + Explicit Conversion
    + 1.2 Methods
    + 1.3 String manipulations
        + String conversion '.parseInt()'
        + String formatting StringBuilder, String.format()
    + 1.4 Operators
        + arithmetical / unary
        + relational / comparison
        + logical / conditional
        + assignment
        + increment/decrement operators
    + 1.5 Statements
        + if-then
        + if-then-else
        + switch
        + ternary operator
    + 1.6 Loop controls
        + FOR foreach, fori
        + while
        + do while
        + continue/break
        + recursion
    + 1.7 Comments
        + single line
        + comment block
    + 1.8 Clean code policy, conventions

# 1.Basics <hr>

## 1.1 Variables

### <u>Declaration</u>

In Java, a variable is a container of reserved area allocated in memory, used to store data that can be accessed, manipulated, and utilized in your
programs. To use a variable, you must declare it, specifying its data type and a name that uniquely identifies it within its scope. Variable
declaration is one of the fundamental concepts in Java, and it plays a crucial role in defining the behavior and structure of your programs.

<b>Key Components of Variable Declaration:</b>

+ <b>Data type:</b> Every variable in Java is associated with a data type, which defines the type of data it can hold. Java has two categories of data
  types: <b>primitive</b> and <b>reference</b>. Primitive data types include `int`, `float`, `char`, and others, while reference data types include
  objects, such as `String`, `Integer` and user-defined classes. The data type determines the range and operations that can be performed on the
  variable.
+ <b>Variable name:</b>A variable name is an identifier that uniquely represents the variable within its scope. Variable names are case-sensitive and
  must adhere to certain naming conventions. They should start with a letter, dollar sign (<b>$</b>), or underscore (<b> _ </b>) and can be followed
  by letters, digits, dollar signs, and underscores. For example:

```java 
class Application {
    int age;           // Declares an integer variable named 'age'
    double price;      // Declares a double-precision floating-point variable named 'price'
    String name;       // Declares a reference variable named 'name' to store a String object
}
```

While declaring a variable, you can also provide an initial value. This is known as variable initialization. For example:

```java 
class Application {
    int count = 0;             // Initializes 'count' to 0
    double temperature = 23.5; // Initializes 'temperature' to 23.5
    String message = "Hello";  // Initializes 'message' with the string "Hello"
}
```

### <u>Scopes</u>

Variable scopes in Java determine the accessibility or visibility of a variable within a program. It defines the boundaries within which a variable
can be accessed and used. There are three primary types of variable scopes in Java:\
<b>Local variables:</b>
Local variables are declared within a method or a code block. Their scope is limited to the method or block in which they are declared. They cannot be
accessed outside of that method or block:

```java
class Application {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // Declared local String variable. It can be accessible only inside main() method.
        String name = "John";
        System.out.println("Hello " + name);
        greetUser();
    }

    // This is another method with another local variable. Despite it has the same naming, 
    // it differs from previous one, as scope of this local variable is only within greetUser() method
    public static void greetUser() {
        String name = "Adam";
        System.out.println("Hello user - " + name + "!");
    }
}
```

<b>Instance variables:</b>
Instance variables, also known as <b>fields</b>/<b>global</b> variables are declared within a class but outside any method or block. They are
associated with objects of that class and can be accessed from any method or block within the class, including subclasses.

```java
class Application {

    // Declared String field. It can be accessible anywhere in this class.
    private String name = "Michael";

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Scratch main = new Scratch();
        main.greetUser();
        main.greetUserAgain();
    }

    // Prints out text message using global `name` variable.
    public void greetUser() {
        System.out.println("Hello user - " + name + "!");
    }

    // This method prints out text message using the same `name` variable, used in greetUser() method.
    public void greetUserAgain() {
        System.out.println("Hello again, " + name + "!!");
    }
}
```

<b>Class variables:</b>
Static variables, also known as class variables, are declared within a class using the 'static' keyword. They are associated with the class itself,
not with individual objects. They can be accessed from any method or block within the class, including subclasses, using the class name.

```java
class Application {

    public static String NAME = "John";

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // You can call this variable by accessing class.variablesName itself anywhere from your app
        System.out.println("Hello, " + Application.name + "!");
    }

    public void greetUser() {
        System.out.println("Hello user - " + Application.name + "!");
    }
}
```

<span style="color:red">At this point you might not see big difference between `instance` and `class` variables, as <b>class variable</b> is binded to
specific class not the object. Things will be more clear later, when we learn about object and how to interact with them.</span>\
<b>Parameters:</b>
Method parameters are a type of local variable, and they have the same scope as other local variables. They exist only within the method where they
are declared. They act as placeholders to receive values when the method or constructor is called:

```java
class Application {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // Calling a methods with String parameters
        greetUser("John");
        greetUser("Alice");
    }

    // A method that takes a String parameter and puts it in `name` variable
    public static void greetUser(String name) {
        System.out.println("Hello, " + name + "!");
    }
}
```

### <u>Variable shadowing</u>

Variable shadowing in Java occurs when a variable declared in an inner scope has the same name as a variable declared in an outer scope. When this
happens, the variable in the inner scope hides or shadows the variable in the outer scope. This means that when you refer to the variable name within
the inner scope, you are actually referring to the variable declared in the inner scope, not the variable declared in the outer scope:

```java
class Application {
    static int number = 10;

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int number = 20;
        System.out.println(number); // Prints 20
    }
}
```

Variable shadowing can be a useful tool for improving code readability and maintainability. It can help to make code more self-documenting and easier
to understand. However, it is important to use variable shadowing carefully, as it can also make code more difficult to debug if you are not careful.

Here are some guidelines for using variable shadowing:

* Only use variable shadowing when it is clear that you are referring to the variable in the inner scope.
* Use descriptive variable names to avoid confusion.
* Comment your code to explain why you are using variable shadowing.

In general, it is a good practice to avoid using variable shadowing unless you have a good reason to do so. If you can avoid it, it is usually better
to use a different variable name in the inner scope to avoid confusion.

### <u>Data types. Primitives vs non-primitives</u>

In Java, data types can be categorized into two main groups: primitive data types and non-primitive data types (also known as reference types):

1. Primitive Data Types - represent simple values and are built into the language. Java supports eight primitive data types:
    * <b>char</b>: A 16-bit Unicode character `char myChar = 'A';`
    * <b>byte</b>: A 8-bit signed integer, ranging from -128 to 127 `byte myByte = 10;`
    * <b>short</b>: A 16-bit signed integer, ranging from -32768 to 32767 `short myShort = 20000;`
    * <b>int</b>: A 32-bit signed integer, ranging from -2147483648 to 2147483647 `int myInt = 123456789;`
    * <b>long</b>: A 64-bit signed integer, ranging from -9223372036854775808 to 9223372036854775807 `long myLong = 9876543210L;`
    * <b>float</b>: A 32-bit single-precision floating-point number `float myFloat = 3.14159265f;`
    * <b>double</b>: A 64-bit double-precision floating-point number `double myDouble = 123.4567890123456789;`
    * <b>boolean</b>: A true or false value `boolean myBoolean = true;`
2. Non-Primitive Data Types (Reference Types) - Non-primitive data types are more complex data structures and include: <u>Strings</u>, <u>
   Arrays</u>, <u>Classes</u>, <u>Interfaces</u>, <u>Enumerations (Enums)</u>. For example:

```java
class Application {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // Array of integers
        int[] intArray = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};

        // String
        String greeting = "Hello, Java!";

        // Class instance
        MyClass myObject = new MyClass();
    }
}

class MyClass {
    // Class definition
}
```

The use of the word `new` is common when initializing non-primitive types in Java, but it's not a strict rule for all cases. The `new` keyword is
specifically used to create an instance of a class or an array in Java, and most non-primitive types fall into these categories:

* <b>Creating Objects:</b> When you're working with classes, you use new to create an instance of that class.
   ```java
    MyClass myObject = new MyClass();
   ```
* <b>Creating Arrays:</b> Similarly, when working with arrays (which are also considered non-primitive types), you use new to allocate memory for the
  array.
   ```java
   int[] myArray = new int[5];
   ```
* <b>String Literal:</b> Although String is a class (a non-primitive type), you can create a String without using new when using a string literal. In
  this case, Java provides a shorthand syntax for creating String objects without explicitly using new.
   ```java
   String greeting = "Hello";
   ```

In summary, while the use of new is common when working with non-primitive types (especially for objects and arrays), there are exceptions, and it's
important to be aware of them. The use of new is tied to the process of creating instances of classes or allocating memory for arrays.

<span style="color:red; font-weight: bold">Important !</span> Understanding the distinction primitive / non-primitive is crucial for memory management
and understanding how variables behave in Java, but this is some advanced level topics. For now lets stick to the point where primitive data types
store simple values directly, while non-primitive types store references to memory locations where the data is held. Real-world example would be:

1. <b>Cupboard Box with a Cookie (Primitive):</b> A cupboard box containing a cookie directly represents a primitive type. The box holds a simple,
   standalone value (the cookie). In Java terms, this is akin to having a primitive variable, like int or char, directly holding a simple value.
2. <b>Bakery Store with a Catalogue (Non-Primitive):</b> The bakery store with a catalogue is an excellent representation of non-primitive types. The
   catalogue provides references or locations (similar to memory addresses or references) to various cookie boxes in the store. In Java, this is
   analogous to using non-primitive types like arrays, collections, or objects that hold references to more complex structures.

### <u>Implicit casting / Explicit casting</u>

Implicit casting and explicit casting are two concepts related to type conversions in programming languages. Let's break down each one:

1. <b>Implicit casting:</b>
    * Also known as widening or automatic casting.
    * It occurs when a data type of lower precision is converted to a data type of higher precision.
    * The conversion is done automatically by the compiler.
    * There's no need for the programmer to explicitly specify the conversion.
    * No data loss occurs during implicit casting.
   ```java
    int intValue = 42;
    long longValue = intValue; // Implicit casting from int to long
   ```
2. <b>Explicit casting:</b>
    * Also known as narrowing or manual casting.
    * It occurs when a data type of higher precision is converted to a data type of lower precision.
    * The conversion needs to be explicitly specified by the programmer.
    * There may be potential data loss during explicit casting, as the higher-precision type might have more information than the lower-precision type
      can accommodate.
    ```java
    double doubleValue = 3.14;
    int intValue = (int) doubleValue; // Explicit casting from double to int
    ```

In the explicit casting example, the (int) syntax indicates that the programmer is intentionally converting a double value to an int. Keep in mind
that this conversion may truncate the decimal part of the double value, leading to potential loss of precision.

It's important to use explicit casting with caution and awareness of the potential consequences, as it involves a deliberate decision by the
programmer to perform a conversion that may result in loss of data or information.

### Autoboxing / Unboxing

Autoboxing in Java is the automatic conversion of primitive data types to their corresponding wrapper classes(Object), and unboxing is the automatic
conversion of wrapper class objects back to primitive types. This feature was introduced in Java 5 to simplify the process of working with primitive
types and their wrapper classes:

1. <b>Autoboxing</b>
    * Converting a primitive type to its corresponding wrapper class.
    * The Java compiler automatically performs this conversion.
    * It is most commonly seen when assigning primitive values to objects of wrapper classes or when passing primitive values to methods that expect
      wrapper class parameters.
      ```java
      // Autoboxing: int to Integer
      int primitiveInt = 42;
      Integer wrapperInteger = primitiveInt; // Automatically converted to Integer
      ```
2. <b>Unboxing</b>
    * Converting a wrapper class object to its corresponding primitive type.
    * The Java compiler automatically performs this conversion.
    * It is most commonly seen when assigning values from objects of wrapper classes to primitive variables or when passing wrapper class objects to
      methods that expect primitive types.
      ```java
      // Unboxing: Integer to int
      Integer wrapperInteger = 42;
      int primitiveInt = wrapperInteger; // Automatically converted to int
      ```

Autoboxing and unboxing help improve code readability by allowing you to work seamlessly between primitive types and their wrapper classes without
having to manually convert between them. However, it's important to be aware of potential performance implications when autoboxing and unboxing are
used in performance-critical code, as it involves the creation of objects.

### Explicit Conversion

While autoboxing and unboxing occur automatically in many situations, there might be cases where you need to perform explicit conversions between
primitive types and wrapper classes using methods provided by the wrapper classes:

```java
// Explicit conversion using methods of wrapper classes
int intValue=42;
        Integer wrapperInteger=Integer.valueOf(intValue); // Explicit conversion to Integer

        double doubleValue=3.14;
        Double wrapperDouble=Double.valueOf(doubleValue); // Explicit conversion to Double
```

In these examples, the `valueOf` method is used to explicitly convert primitive types to their corresponding wrapper classes. Wrapper classes provide
utility methods for explicit conversion, and these methods are helpful when you need more control over the conversion process or when working with
methods that expect wrapper class objects.

In summary, data type conversion using wrapper classes in Java involves autoboxing, unboxing, and explicit conversion using wrapper class methods.
These mechanisms allow you to work seamlessly between primitive types and their object-oriented representations.